Hi guys and welcome back.
In this video we're gonna talk about
object oriented programming.
Object oriented programming is a bit confusing
when you get started, so if you've never seen
object oriented programming before, just take it easy
with the next few videos, watch them a couple of times
if you need to, ask any questions in the course
of the Q and A, if necessary we'll be there to help you out.
Object oriented programming allows us as developers
to write code in a slightly different way
than we would write if we didn't have
object oriented programming.
The purpose of object oriented programming
is to make our life as developers simpler
by allowing us to write code that looks like
what we would work with in the real world
if we were talking about, you know,
real world things like chairs and tables
and printers and things like that,
as opposed to code and data passing
from one function to another.
So that is the purpose of object oriented programming.
And in this video we're going to look at how
it works in Python.
Let's say that you've got a dictionary like this one here
which shows some information about a student.
Now clearly this thing here is not a student,
it is a dictionary that has some data.
And as we know, programming is all about data,
passing data from one place to another and so forth.
So what we've got here is some data that is probably
about a student somewhere in our classroom
or something like that.
Then we've got a function that takes in a sequence
and adds the entire sequence together and divides it
by the length of the sequence and then returns that.
So it gives you the average of a sequence.
For example we could use it to calculate the average
grade of Rolf.
How would you do that?
Well you would have to use the function
and give to it Rolf's grades.
So you do average student grades, like that.
So if we run that you'll see that we get out
the value 88.0 which is the average grade.
However, there is something about this function
which is very important when you are thinking
about object oriented programming,
which is that this function doesn't know anything
about the student.
The function only operates on the input that it receives
and that could be a set of student grades
or it could be something else.
So when we as developers are talking specifically
about a student and we want to calculate specifically
the average student grade for Rolf, it is much nicer
if we can say hey student, what's your average
as opposed to get the average of this sequence
that could or could not be related to the student.
So basically what I want to do is student.average.
This is what object oriented programming
will allow us to do.
But in order to do that, student cannot be a dictionary
because dictionaries you can't do that on.
You have to code your own thing in Python that will
allow you to call the average method inside it,
and that will give you the average of the student.
So it is a very different approach,
and it is not necessarily superior,
but it is different and allows
you to think of your programmes in a different way.
So let's rewrite this example here using object
oriented programming so you'll have a look at the syntax.
The syntax for object oriented programming
or to define a class in Python is to type out a keyword
class, and then the name of your class.
So a class is a definition of something,
but it doesn't create a particular student here,
we're only defining how a student will behave.
So you can say inside the function,
notice that there are four spaces of indentation,
you can define functions.
So you can define a special function called
the underscore underscore init underscore underscore.
So this function name is very important,
and it has two underscores at the start
and two at the end.
And then you put your brackets and in here we're going
to type out self.
Although this is again just a variable name
like in every other function and you can call it
whatever you want, it doesn't have to be self
if you don't want, but self is the convention in Python.
Then in the body of the function you can define
anything you want.
For example, self.name is going to be Rolf.
And what this is doing is it is taking whatever self is
and it is accessing the name property inside of self.
So here we're using the dot notation
to access something inside of self,
and what we're accessing is the name property.
And then we're giving it a value of Rolf.
What that means is that when we use this class
to create something, that thing is going
to have a name of Rolf.
So here's how you create a thing from a class.
We can say something like student, notice that now
this is lowercase because this is a new variable
that we're creating right now,
is a student, which is uppercase S because this the class.
And now we're going to tell it to use the class
to create what's called an object in Python
to create a new thing that behaves
like what this class defines.
So when you do this Python creates a new
essentially empty container if you will
and it runs the init method.
By the way it is a method and not a function
because it is inside of a class.
So when a function is inside of a class
it's called a method.
So when you call the student class,
notice that this bracket notation here
is used to call a function normally.
But we can also use it to call a class.
When you call that Python will automatically
call the init method for you and it will create
this empty thing called self, and you will be able
to modify the name property inside self
and give it the value Rolf.
The name property won't exist by default so doing
this also creates it, which is quite nice.
So once that's done and this self object contains
a name property, Python will give you back that self.
And student will become a name
for the self thing we created,
that thing being an object, that's what they're called.
So we're using this class through the init method
to create an object and assign the name property
inside that object to the string Rolf.
Then that object is what becomes the value
for our student variable.
So you can now do print student.name,
and here what we're doing is we're accessing
the name property of our student variable
which as you know is the self
that we created earlier on, so that will give you Rolf.
And if I run that you see that Rolf comes out.
This is how object oriented programming works in Python.
You call a class, the init method runs,
and what you get back is the object you created
and in the init method you have the opportunity
to set and change its properties.
So what we've got here is the name property
that we're changing.
As well as self.name equals Rolf, we can do self.grades
and make it equal to what we had before,
something like that.
So we're making the grades property of self
equal to this tuple.
And then when the function finishes,
the class gives back self to student
and now you can print out student.grades
if you want and that property will exist there as well,
as you can see.
So nothing terribly complicated up til now.
There's a bit of data being passed from
one place to another,
but this is no different to what we had before really.
If you wanted to get the average of these grades
you would still have to pass them to a function
called average for example and that would give you
the average if you had the function defined.
But using object oriented programming,
there's one more thing you can do which is going
to simplify your life greatly, and that is the main
point of object oriented programming,
which is to define another method such as
the average method inside the class.
And this method will take self as a parameter.
Notice that self again doesn't have to be self,
you can call it whatever you want.
That's just the convention in Python,
we usually call it self but you can call it
whatever you want.
So if you define a method inside a class,
all the methods inside the class have to take a parameter
which will be the object that was created initially.
You can do return sum of self.grades divided by len
of self.grades.
Notice how this method here does not take a sequence,
it just uses the object that was created up here.
So how does Python know that it needs to call
this method with this data here.
Well here's how it works internally.
When you create a new class, the init method
runs and you get this new object placed in student.
Then whenever you want to call this method here,
all you have to do is type out student, the class,
dot average, and then of course because this is essentially
another function, you put in there the student object.
And what this is doing is it's hauling the average method
inside, that's what the dot means,
inside the student class,
so that's this one there.
And the self parameter is going to take the value
of the student variable which has that object
that was created earlier on that contains
the name and the grades.
So if we save that and run it,
you can see that you get 88.2.
Now this is a little bit verbose, there's a few
too many words in there, so Python has a nice bit
of syntax that you can use instead of this one
which is to remove the student argument
from the average function and instead of calling
the average method inside the class,
call it on the object itself.
So if you do student.average, Python is going
to realise that student is a student object,
so you probably want to pass it as self,
as the first argument.
So it will do the conversion for you,
that is the same thing and one is the other,
but this is a little bit shorter,
a little bit easier to read.
And if you name your variables well,
then this is pretty obvious what it's gonna give you back,
it's gonna give you the average of this student.
Now you can make it even better, type average grade say,
and that's going to be just a little bit
more readable as well.
And just to show you that this works,
it does exactly the same thing.
So this is the key benefit of object oriented programming.
You can define methods inside a class
that use the object that was initially created
by the init method within them.
Show that and you don't have to keep track
of multiple different pieces of data
and the object itself can contain these methods
that you want to use inside it,
so all the data and the methods are in one place
inside the class.
Now the init method can also take arguments
or have parameters.
For example, we can have a name parameter as well as self,
so just to recap, all methods inside a class
need to have a parameter such as self
so they can take in the object that
you have been constructing.
But they can also take more arguments,
so here we're going to have another parameter,
the name parameter, and then you'll put the value
of that parameter in the bracket
of the student class call.
So we can put here Bob, let's say.
So now Bob will become the value for name.
Notice that self is given for you, so you don't have
to give it a name, this here will become
the value for name.
But notice that we're not using this name parameter anyway.
We are accessing here self.name, but that's the name
property inside self, it is not this parameter.
If you wanted to access this parameter,
you can do that by doing something like that.
Self.name which is the name property inside self
will take the value of the name variable
inside this method which is this parameter here.
So now if you print student.name you'll see that Bob
will come out because that is what we defined
in the init method.
Let's do the same with grades.
And now as well as name, we have to pass in
a set of grades for the student.
For example, we will do this one,
give it just a little bit of a different set
of grades there, and now we can press play
and notice how the average grade changes.
The average grade is now being calculated
from this set of grades because they are stored
in self.grades for this student.
So when the average grade method is called
it uses those grades.
Remember that you can define multiple students if you want
and that's totally fine.
This call here in line 10 will call the init method,
it will give you a new object, it will populate
self.name of that object with the name argument
and self.grades of the self object with this argument.
And it will give you this student variable back.
I'm gonna call this student two.
The student two variable, exactly the same thing,
calls the init method, passes Rolf as the name
and it creates a new object and sets the name
property of that new object to Rolf
and the grades property of that new object
to this set of grades here.
And what you end up with are two separate
containers of data.
The student variable which is Bob and has these grades,
and the student two variable which is Rolf
and has these grades.
So when you call student2.average_grade,
again what Python is doing is it's calling the student class
and passing student to there.
So self is student two.
When you sum the grades you're going to be summing
these grades here because those are the grades
that are stored inside student two.
But of course you can still do student2.average_grade
instead as that is a bit simpler.
Pressing play now will give you 92.2 and 88.2
as the two averages, one for each student.
All right, that's everything for this video.
I wanted to tell you a little bit about
how object oriented programming works in Python,
how you can define classes, how objects are created,
and how methods work so that you can call them
with the data in those objects.
I hope it's all clear, but if it isn't,
please ask a question in the course Q and A,
we'll be more than happy to help you out.
Thanks for joining me in this video
and I'll see you in the next one.